so I'm Derek Lee I'm a fifth year PhD
candidate in Dr C Freed's lab and I I
recently wrote the paper on amino acid
fermentation it's very challenging
sometimes to take a specific experiment
from a specific paper and try to make an
actionable approach on that that's why
we do both the uh data papers like the
one I just published and we also try to
write review articles to try and take
some of the field together and do more
actionable approaches so I think if
you're looking at the Cancer literature
and you want to find an approach for
yourself or someone else I think it's
important to find out what variables can
you manipulate for example when we talk
about glucose and glutamine you can uh
inhibit the amount of glutamine or
glucose coming into your body by not
eating carbohydrates or sugar such as a
KET IC diet whereas glutamine at least
in the diet you you can't avoid
glutamine glutamine is a fundamental
amino acid that is in all types of food
so that's where unfortunately we need to
use things like drugs or different
compounds to inhibit the utilization of
glutamine so it's not that you have to
understand every single aspect of a
scientific paper because it is very
challenging but I think it's important
to think about what what are the
takeaways from that paper and what's
actionable for you
I think it's really important to
evaluate what stage your cancer is at
for example stage zero or stage one
cancers there's a very high survival
rate for those cancers you don't always
have to go on a 14-day water fast to
deal with a stage zero cancer but you
might want to do a ketogenic diet if you
don't want to do a low dose of
chemotherapy or a surgery to extract it
it's kind of about balancing the the
risk to reward ratio for a given
treatment there's no there's no
treatment on the planet that has no risk
but you have to balance what your stage
is vers what treatment options you want
to approach I think something like press
pulse protocol is something that's more
for stage four cancers because you've
likely exhausted all other options and
maybe the first line chemotherapy didn't
work or it only stopped the tumor for a
little bit and it's come back so press
pulse protocol can now introduce a new
modality to try and fight that cancer
whereas maybe a second line or third
line chemotherapy may not have helped
but again if you have a stage zero or a
stage one maybe doing something like a a
hybrid of metabolic therapy plus some
standard of care can can be applicable
and you can you can see great results
without having to do a a full-blown
protocol or or something more drastic
like that
I I think unfortunately I found myself
in that situation I would definitely
implement the Press pulse protocol and I
think I do have to say that to some
level but I I do truly believe in it
right because I've spent a lot of time
investigating what a cancer cell
actually requires and I know a lot about
the differences between the requirements
of a cancer cell vers a normal cell
which is kind of what my paper went into
right although I didn't have a normal
cell to compare it to we do do those
studies in the lab with with other
people in our lab and I'm pretty
confident that if I can restrict glucose
and glutamine uh in myself I would have
a much better chance against cancer than
someone who did not now do I strictly
have to do press pulse protocol by
itself no I think you could do a press
pulse protocol or metabolic therapy or
ketogenic diet in conjunction with
something like a lowd dose chemotherapy
not all chemotherapies are blisteringly
toxic to the body but at at high doses
they they can be so one of the benefits
of doing a ketogenic diet is that
sometimes you can reduce the amount of
chemotherapy you need or you know maybe
in some cases avoid it entirely but I I
think the first adoption for ketogenic
metabolic therapy or press PSE is is a
hybrid approach and and I think that's
most sustainable for most people because
you will have the support of your
oncologist and uh you won't have to deal
with you know bit bit of an argument
back and forth between an oncologist or
the primary literature you're reading
which which is honestly a very important
consideration when you're you're in this
situation you know you you might be very
bought in to what we write about but you
don't want to have an argument with your
oncologist about it so it it's I think
what a lot of people do is a hybrid
approach and we we we've seen very
successful results as a result of that
so you don't always have to do one or
the other now I personally am a bit
stubborn so I think I would a on the
side of doing ketogenic metabolic
therapy or press pulse by itself first
but I would never rule out taking a
small dose of chemotherapy to augment
the uh state of nutritional ketosis that
I'm now in because I did metabolic
therapy as a as a primer for that lowd
dose
chemotherapy yeah so can can prevention
is a is really important cuz if you can
just avoid dealing with the problem in
the first place you never have to go to
those more severe options what I do is I
try to eat a low carbohydrate or
ketogenic diet in general and I also
work out a lot because I think if you
put these minor stresses on your body
such as
exercise or not an huge influx of
carbohydrates I think these can reduce
the chance of getting risk factors that
will lead lead to cancer down the road
so for example with food if you're
eating a highly processed carbohydrate
diet that might increase your risk of
diabetes and it in fact will now
diabetes and obesity is now essentially
the number one risk factor for cancer so
if you can avoid getting diabetes or
becoming overweight such as by avoiding
a highly processed carbohydrate diet
then you'll have a lower chance of
getting cancer and that will help you
prevent it now I also always stress
people to importance of exercise if we
want to look at glucose and glutamine
for example like in the case of our work
uh muscles function as a sync for
glucose throughout the day and
especially when you're actively doing
exercise your muscles burn glucose very
fast and that can help reduce your
glucose levels in your blood so you
don't have excess glucose in your blood
all the time and another really
important aspect about glutamine is that
we now know that exercise can reduce
glutamine in your body there is a study
or several studies actually that a very
high-intensity exercise so not just
walking around or going for a light jog
but maybe sprinting or very severe
weightlifting can actually reduce
glutamine in your body the concentration
in your blood for several hours now that
might not be enough to completely starve
the cancer cell entirely but if you're
doing something like that in conjunction
with a ketogenic diet you're now
effectively reducing both glucose and
glutamine you know pulsing it or
pressing it depending on which modality
we're talking about and that can help
both prevent cancer induction or
potentially help treat it as well